This painting is a narrative depicting a battle between Emperor Akbar and Ibrahim Husain Mirza in front of the fort of Surat.
This battle came to be years after the MIrza's of Gujarat rebelled against Emperor Akbar.
In the 11th year of Akbar's reign, Mirza Muhammad Hakim, King of Kabul, marched against him.
His courageous efforts, sparked a rebellion that soon spread across the Mirza's lands.
On the 17th year of the rebellion Akbar gained power of Amhadabad in Gujurat,
and now could focus his attention on capturing Muhammad and his son Ibrahim Husain Mirza who were stationed at the fortress of Surat
The Fortress of Surat is a small yet, strong and secure fortress. Built on the seashore in 947 AD it resisted attacks by Europeans for centuries.
The architect used the shoreline to build ditches along the edges of the walls.
The doubled walls were 5 years thick, and totaled 15 yards. They were 20 yeards high.
And they were formed by stone, chuman, and burnt bricks.
Each stone was fastened firmly with clamps of iron.
The top tower, known as the chaukandi, is an invention of the Portuguese.
In this section we are witnessing Ibrahim Husain Mirza speaking with his father Muhammad Husain Mirza, about the advances made by the Emperor's Imperial army.
Next to it, in a later conversation, the two are witnessing the advances of the Imperial army.
Ibrahim anxiously points to the army in the imagined distance after hearing they were only 8 miles from the fortress.
Soon after Ibrahim leaves the fortress to cause distress in the nearby town of Sarnal,
while Muhammad is left to watch the battle that would later happen in the open plains near the fortress.
As Akbar advanced up the Mahindri river, he was informed that Ibrahim Husain Mirza had left to the town of Sarnal in attempt to raise disturbances and rebellion elsewhere.
While many of Akbars soldiers, remained stationed in Amhadabad, Akbar took a regiment of 200 to march towards Ibrahim.
Upon arrival, The Emperor sent 40 bowed horsemen on the banks of the Mahindri river,
while his force of 100 crossed the river to attack Ibrahim in the town of Sarnal.
Meanwhile, Ibrahim Husain from illfatedness and shortness of vision,
immediately prepared for battle and came out of the town and took post on rising ground.
With his force of about 1000 horsemen Ibrahim Husain sent his army out in the open plain
to meet Akbar's army who were steadily advancing.
In the plains, the two parties met one another.
Ibrahim Husain attacked upon the regiment of 40 bowman while the rest of the Emperor's army circled back from Sarnal.
Along the uneven pathway hedges of thorns stopped the Emperor's horsemen from pursuing,
so the Emperor himself along with Raja Bhagwan Das went to the front.
With three enemy horsemen approaching the two of them got caught in the thorns of the prickly pears.
Raja hurdled his spear and struck the one horseman while the other two tried to assualt His Majesty.
The Emperor; tiger-slayer and world-champion urged on his horse and jumped over the thorns and in front of the enemies.
Seeing the danger placed upon the Emperor, the inspired troops made a desperate onslaught of the enemy.
Disheartened by the current loses Ibrahim Husain retreated and fled to Sirohi by the way of Ahmagnagar.
Upon hearing this news wife of Ibrahim Husain Mirza took their son Muzaffar and fled to Dekhin.
The Emperor in, his world-conquering mind desired that the pursuit should not be given up till Ibrahim hussain should be seized, but as the cup of his life was not yet full the darkness of night threw a veil over him.